PYSPARK INTERVIEW QUESTIONS FOR DATA ENGINEERS - TOPIC WISE
============================================================

1. APACHE SPARK AND PYSPARK BASICS
----------------------------------
1. What is Apache Spark?
   Spark is a distributed computing engine for large-scale batch processing, streaming, SQL, and machine learning.

2. What is PySpark?
   PySpark is Spark's Python API.

3. Why is Spark faster than traditional MapReduce for many workloads?
   Spark builds optimized execution plans and can reuse in-memory data instead of writing every intermediate result
   to disk.

4. What are Spark's main modules?
   Spark Core, Spark SQL, Structured Streaming, MLlib, and GraphX. GraphX does not have a full native Python API.

5. When should Spark not be used?
   Avoid it for small data that fits easily on one machine, low-latency transactional processing, or simple tasks
   where distributed-computing overhead is greater than the benefit.

6. What is a Spark application?
   It is one driver process plus executors that run tasks for that application.

7. What is the driver?
   The driver runs the user program, creates the Spark session/context, builds plans, and schedules work.

8. What is an executor?
   An executor is a worker process that runs tasks and stores cached or shuffle data for one Spark application.

9. What is a cluster manager?
   It allocates resources to Spark applications. Examples include standalone, YARN, and Kubernetes.

10. What is SparkSession?
    SparkSession is the main entry point for DataFrame, SQL, catalog, and configuration operations.


2. SPARK EXECUTION MODEL
------------------------
1. What is a job in Spark?
   An action creates one or more jobs.

2. What is a stage?
   A stage is a group of tasks that can execute without crossing a shuffle boundary.

3. What is a task?
   A task is the smallest unit of scheduled work, normally processing one partition.

4. What is a partition?
   A partition is a logical chunk of distributed data processed by one task at a time.

5. What is lazy evaluation?
   Spark records transformations and waits for an action before executing them.

6. Why does Spark use lazy evaluation?
   It lets Spark optimize the complete plan and avoid unnecessary work.

7. What is a DAG?
   A directed acyclic graph represents dependencies between transformations and execution stages.

8. What creates a stage boundary?
   A shuffle operation normally creates a new stage.

9. What is a shuffle?
   A shuffle redistributes data between executors, often for joins, groupBy, distinct, or repartition.

10. Why are shuffles expensive?
    They involve network transfer, serialization, disk I/O, sorting, and additional memory pressure.


3. RDD, DATAFRAME, AND DATASET
------------------------------
1. What is an RDD?
   An RDD is an immutable distributed collection with low-level transformation and action APIs.

2. What is a DataFrame?
   A DataFrame is distributed tabular data with named columns and a schema.

3. Why are DataFrames usually preferred over RDDs?
   DataFrames provide schema information and allow Catalyst and Tungsten to optimize execution.

4. Does PySpark have the typed Dataset API?
   Python mainly uses DataFrames. The strongly typed Dataset API is available in Scala and Java.

5. When might an RDD be useful?
   For specialized low-level transformations or unstructured objects that do not fit DataFrame operations.

6. Are Spark DataFrames immutable?
   Yes. Transformations return new DataFrames instead of modifying existing ones.

7. What is Row in PySpark?
   Row represents a record with fields that can be accessed by name or position.


4. CREATING AND READING DATAFRAMES
----------------------------------
1. How do you create a DataFrame from Python data?
   Use spark.createDataFrame(data, schema).

2. How do you read a CSV file?
   Use spark.read.option("header", True).schema(schema).csv(path).

3. Why should production pipelines avoid inferSchema?
   Inference adds a scan, can infer inconsistent types, and weakens the data contract.

4. How do you read Parquet or Delta data?
   Use spark.read.parquet(path) or spark.read.format("delta").load(path).

5. What is the difference between load(path) and table(name)?
   load reads files at a path. table reads a catalog-registered table.

6. How do you read multiple files?
   Pass a list of paths or use a supported path pattern.

7. How can corrupt records be handled?
   Configure parsing mode and a corrupt-record column, or quarantine invalid input explicitly.

8. What are common parsing modes?
   PERMISSIVE, DROPMALFORMED, and FAILFAST. Exact support can vary by data source.


5. SCHEMAS AND DATA TYPES
-------------------------
1. How do you define an explicit schema?
   Build StructType containing StructField values, or use a DDL schema string.

2. What is the benefit of an explicit schema?
   It improves reliability, avoids inference cost, and documents expected types and nullability.

3. What is nullable in StructField?
   It indicates whether the field may contain null; enforcement depends on how data enters Spark.

4. How do you cast a column?
   Use col("amount").cast("decimal(18,2)").

5. Why use DecimalType for financial values?
   Decimal provides controlled precision, unlike binary floating-point types.

6. How do you inspect a DataFrame schema?
   Use printSchema(), schema, or dtypes.

7. What are StructType, ArrayType, and MapType?
   They represent nested records, arrays, and key-value maps.

8. How do you handle schema evolution?
   Define compatibility rules and use format-specific evolution options carefully; do not accept unexpected
   changes blindly.


6. TRANSFORMATIONS AND ACTIONS
------------------------------
1. What is a transformation?
   A transformation creates a new DataFrame or RDD and is evaluated lazily.

2. What is an action?
   An action triggers execution and returns a result or writes output.

3. Give examples of transformations.
   select, filter, withColumn, join, groupBy, distinct, and orderBy.

4. Give examples of actions.
   count, collect, first, take, show, foreach, and write operations.

5. What is the difference between select() and withColumn()?
   select chooses or computes a set of columns. withColumn adds or replaces one named column.

6. How do you rename a column?
   Use withColumnRenamed(), alias() inside select, or toDF() for all names.

7. How do you remove columns?
   Use drop().

8. How do you remove duplicate rows?
   Use distinct() for complete rows or dropDuplicates(subset) for selected keys.

9. Why can repeated withColumn calls be undesirable?
   Very long chains can create large logical plans. A single select can express many independent columns clearly.


7. NARROW AND WIDE TRANSFORMATIONS
----------------------------------
1. What is a narrow transformation?
   Each output partition depends on a small number of input partitions and normally avoids a shuffle.

2. Give examples of narrow transformations.
   map, filter, select, and many withColumn operations.

3. What is a wide transformation?
   Output partitions depend on data from many input partitions and usually require a shuffle.

4. Give examples of wide transformations.
   groupBy, distinct, orderBy, repartition, and most non-broadcast joins.

5. Why does this distinction matter?
   Wide transformations are more expensive and create stage boundaries.


8. NULLS, DATES, AND STRINGS
----------------------------
1. How do you check for null?
   Use col("x").isNull() or isNotNull(), not Python's == None inside a Spark expression.

2. How do you replace null values?
   Use fillna()/na.fill(), coalesce(), or conditional expressions.

3. What is Spark SQL's null-safe equality operator?
   <=> in SQL or eqNullSafe() in the DataFrame API treats two nulls as equal.

4. How do you parse a date?
   Use to_date(column, format).

5. How do you parse a timestamp?
   Use to_timestamp(column, format).

6. Why is timezone handling important?
   Parsing and display can depend on the Spark session timezone. Store a defined standard such as UTC.

7. How do you split and extract strings?
   Use split(), substring(), regexp_extract(), and regexp_replace().

8. How do you build conditional logic?
   Use when(condition, value).otherwise(value).


9. AGGREGATIONS
---------------
1. How do you aggregate data?
   Use groupBy().agg() with functions such as sum, count, min, max, and avg.

2. What is the difference between count("*") and count("column")?
   count("*") counts rows. count("column") ignores null values in that column.

3. How do you count distinct values?
   Use countDistinct(). approx_count_distinct() is useful when an estimate is acceptable.

4. What is pivot?
   Pivot turns distinct values from one column into output columns and aggregates their values.

5. Why can pivot be expensive?
   It causes a shuffle and may produce many columns. Provide known pivot values when possible.

6. What is rollup?
   rollup calculates hierarchical subtotal combinations.

7. What is cube?
   cube calculates subtotal combinations across all specified grouping dimensions.


10. JOINS
---------
1. Which joins does PySpark support?
   Inner, left, right, full outer, cross, left semi, and left anti joins.

2. What does a left semi join return?
   Left-side rows that have a match, containing only left-side columns.

3. What does a left anti join return?
   Left-side rows that do not have a match.

4. What is a broadcast join?
   Spark copies a small relation to executors so the large relation can join without a full shuffle.

5. How do you request a broadcast join?
   Use broadcast(small_df), a SQL hint, or rely on automatic broadcast thresholds.

6. What is a sort-merge join?
   Both sides are shuffled by key and sorted before matching. It is common for large equi-joins.

7. How do duplicate keys affect a join?
   Many-to-many matches multiply rows. Validate key uniqueness and expected output grain.

8. How do you avoid duplicate join-key columns?
   Join using a shared key name, such as left.join(right, "id"), or explicitly select/alias columns.

9. What is a cross join?
   It returns every left-right row combination and can produce extremely large output.

10. How are null join keys handled?
    Normal equality does not match null to null. Use null-safe equality only when that matches business rules.


11. WINDOW FUNCTIONS
--------------------
1. What is a window function?
   It computes a value across related rows without reducing them to one row per group.

2. How do you define a window?
   Use Window.partitionBy(...).orderBy(...), optionally with a row or range frame.

3. What is the difference between row_number, rank, and dense_rank?
   row_number is unique; rank leaves gaps after ties; dense_rank does not leave gaps.

4. How do you select the latest record per key?
   Apply row_number over a key partition ordered by timestamp descending, then filter row number 1.

5. What do lag and lead do?
   They access values from previous or following rows in a window order.

6. What is the difference between rowsBetween and rangeBetween?
   rowsBetween uses physical row positions. rangeBetween uses values relative to the ordering expression.

7. Why can window functions be expensive?
   They often require repartitioning by keys and sorting within partitions.


12. PARTITIONING AND SHUFFLES
-----------------------------
1. What determines the number of input partitions?
   File sizes, source splits, format, and Spark source configurations.

2. What does repartition() do?
   It shuffles data to produce a requested number of partitions, optionally by columns.

3. What does coalesce() do?
   It normally reduces partitions with less data movement than repartition.

4. When should you repartition by a column?
   Before repeated operations that benefit from the same distribution, when the shuffle cost is justified.

5. What is spark.sql.shuffle.partitions?
   It is the default partition count for many DataFrame shuffle operations.

6. What is data skew?
   Skew occurs when some partition keys contain much more data than others.

7. How do you detect skew?
   Inspect key-frequency distributions and Spark UI task durations, input sizes, and shuffle metrics.

8. How can skew be handled?
   Filter early, broadcast a small side, enable AQE skew handling, split hot keys, or carefully salt keys.

9. What is key salting?
   It adds a controlled secondary value to spread a hot key, followed by logic to restore correct results.

10. Why are too many small partitions harmful?
    They increase scheduling, metadata, and file-management overhead.


13. CACHE, PERSIST, AND CHECKPOINT
----------------------------------
1. What does cache() do?
   It marks a DataFrame for reuse with the default storage level; materialization occurs on an action.

2. What does persist() do?
   It is like cache but allows an explicit storage level.

3. When should data be cached?
   Cache expensive intermediate data that is reused enough to justify memory and materialization cost.

4. How do you remove cached data?
   Use unpersist().

5. Why can caching make performance worse?
   It can consume executor memory, trigger eviction/spilling, and add work for data used only once.

6. What is checkpointing?
   Checkpointing writes data to reliable storage and truncates its lineage.

7. What is the difference between cache and checkpoint?
   Cache is primarily for reuse and retains lineage. Checkpoint creates a durable lineage break.


14. CATALYST, TUNGSTEN, AND AQE
-------------------------------
1. What is Catalyst?
   Catalyst is Spark SQL's query optimizer for analyzing and optimizing logical and physical plans.

2. What is predicate pushdown?
   Spark asks a compatible data source to read only rows matching filters.

3. What is column pruning?
   Spark reads and processes only required columns when supported.

4. What is Tungsten?
   Tungsten refers to Spark execution improvements involving memory management and generated code.

5. What is whole-stage code generation?
   Spark combines compatible operators into generated JVM code to reduce interpretation and virtual calls.

6. What is Adaptive Query Execution?
   AQE re-optimizes parts of a query at runtime using observed statistics.

7. What can AQE improve?
   It can coalesce shuffle partitions, handle some skewed joins, and change join strategies.

8. How do you inspect an execution plan?
   Use df.explain(), df.explain("formatted"), SQL EXPLAIN, and the Spark UI.


15. UDFS AND PYTHON PERFORMANCE
-------------------------------
1. Why should built-in Spark functions be preferred?
   Catalyst understands and optimizes them, and they avoid unnecessary Python-JVM data transfer.

2. What is a Python UDF?
   It runs custom Python logic for column values but often adds serialization and optimization overhead.

3. What is a Pandas UDF?
   It uses Arrow to process batches as pandas objects, often faster than a scalar Python UDF.

4. When should a UDF be used?
   Only when required logic cannot be expressed clearly with built-in SQL/DataFrame functions.

5. What is Apache Arrow in PySpark?
   Arrow is a columnar in-memory format that speeds certain Python-pandas and JVM data transfers.

6. Why is collect() dangerous?
   It transfers all records to the driver and can cause driver out-of-memory failures.

7. What are safer alternatives to collect()?
   Use limit, take, aggregations, distributed writes, or toLocalIterator when sequential driver processing is safe.

8. Why can normal Python loops be slow for DataFrame logic?
   They execute on the driver instead of expressing distributed operations to Spark.


16. FILE FORMATS AND DATA LAYOUT
--------------------------------
1. Why is Parquet preferred for analytics?
   It is columnar, compressed, splittable, and supports column pruning and predicate pushdown.

2. What is the difference between row and columnar formats?
   Row formats store complete records together. Columnar formats store values by column for efficient analytics.

3. What are common Spark file formats?
   Parquet, ORC, Avro, JSON, CSV, text, and Delta when its connector is available.

4. Why is CSV usually poor for large analytical storage?
   It lacks reliable types, efficient column pruning, and strong compression compared with columnar formats.

5. What is partition pruning?
   Spark skips partition directories that cannot match partition-column filters.

6. How should partition columns be selected?
   Choose frequently filtered, reasonably distributed, low-to-moderate cardinality columns.

7. What is the small-files problem?
   Many tiny files increase listing, scheduling, metadata, and open/close overhead.

8. How can small files be reduced?
   Control output partitions, compact files, and use table-format optimization features.

9. What is write mode append?
   It adds output without replacing existing data.

10. What is write mode overwrite?
    It replaces matching data according to the data source and overwrite configuration; use carefully.


17. DELTA LAKE
--------------
1. What is Delta Lake?
   Delta Lake is a table format that adds a transaction log, ACID transactions, schema controls, and table history
   to object storage.

2. What is the Delta transaction log?
   It records table versions, active files, metadata, and operations.

3. What is time travel?
   It queries an earlier table version or timestamp while the required history and files remain available.

4. What is MERGE?
   MERGE conditionally updates, inserts, or deletes target rows based on source matches.

5. How is schema enforcement different from schema evolution?
   Enforcement rejects incompatible writes. Evolution intentionally permits supported schema changes.

6. What does OPTIMIZE do in Databricks?
   It compacts files and can improve data layout using supported clustering options.

7. What does VACUUM do?
   It removes old unreferenced files beyond retention rules, limiting access to older versions.

8. Why must VACUUM retention be handled carefully?
   Aggressive cleanup can break time travel or readers still referencing old files.

9. What is the medallion architecture?
   Bronze keeps source-like data, silver holds cleaned reusable data, and gold serves business-ready results.

10. How do you build an idempotent Delta load?
    Use stable business keys, deterministic transformations, MERGE/replace semantics, and tracked input state.


18. STRUCTURED STREAMING
------------------------
1. What is Structured Streaming?
   It is Spark's streaming engine that expresses incremental processing with DataFrame and SQL APIs.

2. What is micro-batch processing?
   Spark processes newly available data in a sequence of small batches.

3. What is a streaming checkpoint?
   It stores progress and state metadata needed for recovery.

4. Why must each streaming query have a stable checkpoint location?
   Reusing, deleting, or changing it incorrectly can cause duplicate processing or incompatible recovery.

5. What output modes are available?
   Append, update, and complete, depending on the query and sink.

6. What is a watermark?
   A watermark defines how late event-time data may arrive and helps bound state for supported operations.

7. Does a watermark guarantee that no late data is dropped?
   No. Data later than the watermark policy may be dropped for stateful operations.

8. What is event time versus processing time?
   Event time is when the source event occurred. Processing time is when Spark processed it.

9. What is foreachBatch?
   It runs custom batch logic for each micro-batch and provides a batch ID.

10. How can streaming writes be made idempotent?
    Use transactional sinks, checkpoints, stable keys, batch IDs, and deduplication or MERGE logic.

11. What is stream-static join?
    It joins each streaming batch with a static DataFrame.

12. What makes a stateful streaming query expensive?
    Large key cardinality, long watermark horizons, skew, and unbounded state growth.


19. DATA QUALITY AND INCREMENTAL PROCESSING
-------------------------------------------
1. What is idempotency?
   Processing the same input again produces the same final state without unintended duplicates.

2. What is a watermark in batch ingestion?
   It is a stored high value, such as timestamp or ID, used to extract only newer source records.

3. How do you handle late-arriving records?
   Use an overlap window, CDC, event-time policy, or periodic reconciliation and deduplication.

4. How do you deduplicate records?
   Define the business key and ordering rule, then use dropDuplicates or row_number to keep the correct record.

5. What quality checks are common?
   Completeness, uniqueness, validity, consistency, freshness, and referential integrity.

6. How should bad records be handled?
   Fail critical contracts or quarantine records with reason, source, and run metadata for investigation.

7. What metadata should a pipeline record?
   Run ID, source, input/output counts, invalid counts, timestamps, watermark, status, and error details.

8. How do you process source deletes?
   Use CDC/tombstones when available or compare snapshots, then apply an explicit hard- or soft-delete policy.


20. SPARK CONFIGURATION AND CLUSTER RESOURCES
---------------------------------------------
1. What are executor cores and executor memory?
   They control task concurrency and memory available inside each executor process.

2. What is driver memory used for?
   Plans, task scheduling, metadata, collected results, and driver-side application logic.

3. What happens when executor memory is insufficient?
   Spark may spill to disk, spend time in garbage collection, or fail with out-of-memory errors.

4. What is dynamic allocation?
   It adjusts executor count based on workload demand when supported and configured.

5. Why are very large executors sometimes harmful?
   They can cause long garbage-collection pauses, poor parallelism, and greater impact from executor loss.

6. What is speculative execution?
   Spark may run duplicate copies of unusually slow tasks and keep the first successful result.

7. What is serialization?
   It converts objects into a transferable or storable representation.

8. What should determine cluster sizing?
   Measured data volume, shuffle size, memory pressure, task concurrency, runtime targets, and cost.


21. MONITORING AND TROUBLESHOOTING
----------------------------------
1. What can you inspect in the Spark UI?
   Jobs, stages, tasks, SQL plans, executors, storage, input/output, shuffle, spills, and task timing.

2. How do you recognize a skewed stage?
   A few tasks run much longer or process much more data than the others.

3. What does spill indicate?
   Execution data exceeded available memory and was written to disk.

4. What can cause executor loss?
   Out-of-memory errors, container limits, node failure, network problems, or cluster preemption.

5. Why might a Spark job appear stuck?
   Skew, slow I/O, unavailable executors, huge shuffles, external calls, or excessive garbage collection.

6. How should performance tuning begin?
   Measure the slow stage and inspect its plan and metrics before changing configuration.

7. What are signs of too many small files?
   Long file listing, many tiny tasks, high scheduling overhead, and slow table reads.

8. What should be logged for production jobs?
   Run identifiers, input/output locations, counts, durations, checkpoints/watermarks, and actionable errors.


22. TESTING AND PRODUCTION PRACTICES
------------------------------------
1. How do you unit-test PySpark transformations?
   Create a local Spark session, use small deterministic DataFrames, call pure transformations, and compare schema
   and rows.

2. Why should transformation logic be separated from I/O?
   Pure DataFrame-in/DataFrame-out functions are easier to test and reuse.

3. How do you compare DataFrame results?
   Compare schemas and rows with order handled explicitly, or use an appropriate DataFrame assertion utility.

4. Why should output order not be assumed?
   Distributed DataFrames are unordered unless an explicit orderBy is applied.

5. How should secrets be handled?
   Use a managed secret store, workload identity, or platform secret scope; never hard-code them.

6. How should environment-specific values be handled?
   Pass parameters or configuration rather than hard-coding paths and catalog names.

7. What makes a pipeline restartable?
   Durable state, atomic writes, idempotent transformations, clear run boundaries, and controlled retries.

8. Why should Python dependencies be pinned?
   Reproducible versions reduce deployment and runtime differences.


23. COMMON CODING QUESTIONS
---------------------------
1. How do you filter rows?
   result = df.filter(F.col("amount") > 0)

2. How do you create a derived column?
   result = df.withColumn("total", F.col("price") * F.col("quantity"))

3. How do you replace null amounts with zero?
   result = df.fillna({"amount": 0})

4. How do you aggregate revenue by date?
   result = df.groupBy("order_date").agg(F.sum("amount").alias("revenue"))

5. How do you find duplicate business keys?
   df.groupBy("id").count().filter(F.col("count") > 1)

6. How do you keep the latest row per ID?
   Use row_number over Window.partitionBy("id").orderBy(F.col("updated_at").desc()), then keep row number 1.

7. How do you perform a left anti join?
   missing = left.join(right, on="id", how="left_anti")

8. How do you broadcast a small DataFrame?
   result = large.join(F.broadcast(small), "id")

9. How do you write a partitioned Parquet dataset?
   df.write.mode("append").partitionBy("event_date").parquet(path)

10. How do you write a managed Delta table?
    df.write.format("delta").mode("append").saveAsTable("catalog.schema.table")

11. How do you inspect the physical plan?
    df.explain("formatted")

12. How do you reduce output to ten partitions?
    df.coalesce(10), when reducing without balanced redistribution; otherwise use repartition(10).


24. SCENARIO-BASED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
--------------------------------------
1. A job processing the same data is suddenly slower. What do you check?
   Compare input size and schema, execution plans, cluster resources, file counts, join strategy, skew, spills,
   shuffle metrics, and external-source performance.

2. One task runs for 30 minutes while others finish in one minute. What is likely wrong?
   Data skew, a very large input file, slow external work, or resource issues. Confirm with task-level metrics.

3. A join unexpectedly multiplies the row count. What do you do?
   Check key uniqueness and null behavior on both sides, confirm intended grain, and deduplicate only according to
   a valid business rule.

4. A pipeline creates thousands of tiny files each day. How do you fix it?
   Reduce write partitions based on target file size, compact existing files, and avoid high-cardinality partition
   columns.

5. A collect() call crashes the driver. What is the solution?
   Keep processing distributed, aggregate or limit results, and write output instead of collecting all rows.

6. A Python UDF is the slowest operator. What do you do?
   Replace it with built-in expressions if possible, otherwise test a vectorized Pandas UDF and measure.

7. How do you safely rerun yesterday's failed load?
   Reprocess a defined input window into an idempotent target using stable keys and transactional writes.

8. How do you design a daily incremental customer load?
   Extract changes using CDC or a watermark, land immutable raw data, validate and deduplicate, then MERGE by
   customer key and track the successful source position.

9. How do you handle a new source column?
   Decide whether it is compatible, update the contract and transformations, test downstream impact, and enable
   controlled schema evolution only when appropriate.

10. How do you optimize a large fact-to-small-dimension join?
    Filter and select columns early, verify dimension size and uniqueness, then consider a broadcast join.

11. How do you handle a large fact-to-large-fact join?
    Reduce both sides first, align keys and types, inspect distribution/skew, allow an appropriate distributed join,
    and tune shuffle partitions based on metrics.

12. How do you perform a historical backfill without disrupting daily loads?
    Use separate parameters, compute, and output boundaries; process bounded periods; preserve idempotency; and
    reconcile results before promotion.

13. How do you troubleshoot executor out-of-memory errors?
    Identify the failing operator, skew, partition sizes, cache usage, joins, and Python memory before changing
    executor sizing.

14. How do you ensure source and target reconciliation?
    Record counts and business totals by extraction window, compare rejected records, and alert on unexplained
    differences.

15. How do you protect sensitive columns?
    Apply least-privilege access, encryption, masking or row/column controls, audit logging, and avoid exposing raw
    sensitive data unnecessarily.


25. RAPID REVISION QUESTIONS
----------------------------
1. Transformation versus action?
   A transformation builds a lazy plan; an action executes it.

2. Driver versus executor?
   The driver plans and schedules; executors run tasks and store distributed data.

3. repartition versus coalesce?
   repartition shuffles for balanced redistribution; coalesce usually reduces partitions with less movement.

4. cache versus checkpoint?
   Cache supports reuse and keeps lineage; checkpoint persists data and truncates lineage.

5. DataFrame versus RDD?
   DataFrames have schemas and optimizer support; RDDs provide lower-level object processing.

6. groupBy versus window?
   groupBy reduces rows per group; a window retains row-level output.

7. distinct versus dropDuplicates?
   distinct compares all columns; dropDuplicates can use a subset.

8. left semi versus inner join?
   Left semi returns only matching left rows and left columns; inner returns combined matching rows.

9. left anti versus left join?
   Left anti returns unmatched left rows; left join returns every left row with optional right values.

10. broadcast join versus sort-merge join?
    Broadcast copies a small side to executors; sort-merge shuffles and sorts both sides.

11. Parquet versus CSV?
    Parquet is typed and columnar; CSV is text-based and lacks reliable schema metadata.

12. batch watermark versus streaming watermark?
    A batch watermark tracks extracted source progress. A streaming watermark bounds late-data state by event time.

13. append versus overwrite?
    Append adds data; overwrite replaces data according to the target and overwrite configuration.

14. built-in function versus Python UDF?
    Built-ins are optimizer-visible and generally faster; Python UDFs add a Python execution boundary.

15. Why is idempotency important?
    It makes retries and recovery safe without corrupting or duplicating final data.
